
# *Pa*REx: an open‑source pipeline for the automated analysis of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* resistomes from whole‑genome sequences

The *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* Resistome Explorer (*Pa*REx) is an open-source Python-based customizable pipeline that has been specifically designed for the automated analysis of *P. aeruginosa* resistomes from Illumina® paired-end reads. *Pa*REx uses different open-source bioinformatics tools, software and publicly available databases along with custom-built databases, scripts and tools and is composed by two main components the PaREx pipeline and the PaREx databases.

## Requirements
- Python 3.8 or higher
- Other packages listed in `requirements.txt`

## Installation of *Pa*REx custom-built scripts and tools

1. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/project.git  CAMBIAR POR: https://github.com/ARPBIG/PaREx.git
   cd parex
   ```

2. Install dependencies:

   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Installation of *Pa*REx custom-built databases

There is a repository including all custom-built databases [parex-databases](https://github.com/matiasbonet/References4alignment  CAMBIAR POR: https://github.com/ARPBIG/parex-databases.git). 

 ```bash
   cd ..
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/project.git  CAMBIAR POR: https://github.com/ARPBIG/parex-databases.git
   cd parex
   ```

## Installation of third-party bioinformatic tools, software and databases 

You can use the install.sh:  

   ```bash
   chmod 755 install.sh
   sh install.sh 
   ```


OR alternatively you can install them by your own: 


1. **Trimmomatic**
   - Download and extract from the official source:
     ```bash
     wget http://www.usadellab.org/cms/uploads/supplementary/Trimmomatic/Trimmomatic-0.39.zip
     unzip Trimmomatic-0.39.zip
     ```

2. **SPAdes**
   - Download and extract the Linux version from the official source:
     ```bash
     CAMBIAR URL! :  wget http://cab.spbu.ru/files/release3.15.3/SPAdes-3.15.3-Linux.tar.gz
     tar -xzf SPAdes-3.15.3-Linux.tar.gz
     ```

3. **Snippy**
   - Install Snippy by cloning its GitHub repository:
     ```bash
     git clone https://github.com/tseemann/snippy.git
     ```

4. **MLST**
   - MLST requires a specific download setup based on system. Instructions are available at its [official source](https://github.com/tseemann/mlst).
   - *Pa*REx validation was performed with the *P. aeruginosa* database available on November 2024.

5. **Resfinder**
   - Resfinder requires a specific download setup based on system. Instructions are available at its [official source](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/resfinder.git)
   - *Pa*REx uses the version 2.1.0 of the resfinder database.
     

## Configuration 

Configure the `.json` files in the `programs_scripts/configs/` folder. 
If `.json` files are missing, you need to create them from the provided `.json.sample` files. 
You need to adjust the paths for the following configuration files: 

### Configuration Files

- **general.json**: Contains global settings, including the path to the projects and to PaREx databases.
- **trimmomatic.json**, **SPAdes.json**, **snippy.json**, **mlst.json**, **resfinder.json**: Specific configurations for each third-party tool used in the pipeline.


## *Pa*REx general usage  --> INTRODUCIR create_project, create_sample_list, novaseq, trimmomatic, resistome, single file! 

### Running the Complete Pipeline

The pipeline can be executed from the command line with the following parameters:

```bash
python execute_pipeline.py PROJECT_NAME operation [--reference REFERENCE_PATH] [--log-level LOG_LEVEL] [--force]
```

- **PROJECT_NAME**: Project name. This will be used as a folder name in the `PROJECTS_PATH` specified in `general.json`.
- **operation**: Operation to execute. You can specify a single operation or multiple ones separated by commas.
- **--reference**: Path to the reference file (optional).
- **--log-level**: Logging level (`DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARNING`, `ERROR`, `CRITICAL`).
- **--force**: Forces the execution of processes.

### Example

To run the `trimmomatic` operation for the `Sample_A` project with `DEBUG` log level:

```bash
python execute_pipeline.py Sample_A trimmomatic --log-level DEBUG
```

### Available Operations

The available operations include:

- `create_project`: Creates the initial structure for a project.
- `create_sample_list`: Generates a sample list.
- `generate_excel`: Generates a consolidated Excel report.
- `trimmomatic`: Performs sequence trimming.
- `SPAdes`: Performs de novo assembly.
- `bowtie`: Performs sequence alignment.
- `resfinder`, `oprD`, `mlst`, `snippy`, `PDC`.

### Command executions:
#### Snippy Output Filtering and Post-Processing
This script to automate the filtering and post-processing of Snippy outputs. The script parses VCF files generated by Snippy to identify polymorphisms and filter out predefined mutations based on a reference Excel file. It generates cleaned and combined results in an Excel file with separate sheets for "All" and "Basic" polymorphisms. This ensures a streamlined workflow for variant analysis and simplifies downstream genomic studies.

## Logs


## Contact

For questions or issues, open an *issue*

## Code Structure

- **programs_scripts/**: Contains specific scripts for each step of the pipeline.
- **programs_scripts/configs/**: Configuration files in `.json` format necessary for running the scripts. Also includes `.json.sample` example files.
- **execute_pipelines**: Run with `python execute_pipelines.py PROJECT_NAME "commands"`

## Generated Folders
- **logs/**: Folder where logs generated during execution are stored.
- **PROJECTS/**: Folder to store project-related data, it is the base to create and add the FASTQ files for input data


## Input Files

The project is designed to handle a variety of input file formats, ensuring flexibility and compatibility with different sequencing workflows:

- **FASTQ Files**: Raw sequencing reads in FASTQ format are the primary input for processing workflows. These files typically contain paired-end reads (`R1` and `R2`) generated from Illumina or similar platforms.

- **NovaSeq Files**: High-throughput NovaSeq files are supported, allowing seamless integration with modern sequencing technologies. It converts in the output into FASTQ files R1/R2

- **De Novo Assembly Files**: For workflows that bypass raw read processing, preassembled de novo files can be directly utilized. This is particularly useful for tools and analyses that focus on assembled genomes, reducing the computational overhead of preprocessing.

This multi-format compatibility enables the project to adapt to different experimental setups, whether working with raw sequencing data or preassembled genomes, enhancing its usability and flexibility across genomic research pipelines.


Log files are stored in the `logs/` folder. They are automatically generated with each run and saved in the `Logs/` subdirectory within each project.

 in the repository or contact the development team at [matiasbonet@oceandrivers.com](mailto:matiasbonet@oceandrivers.com). [carla.lopez@ssib.es](mailto:carla.lopez@ssib.es)
